# Luna Programming Language

Welcome to the Luna Programming Language! Luna is a programming language designed and implemented as my first foray into language development. It features a stack-based virtual machine (VM) that executes bytecode generated by the Luna compiler.

## Features

- **Global Variables:** Supports global variables for data storage across the entire program.
- **Local Variables:** Allows the use of local variables within functions for temporary and encapsulated storage.
- **First-Class Functions:** Functions are first-class citizens, enabling them to be passed as arguments, returned from other functions, and stored in variables.
- **Control Flow:** Provides control flow mechanisms including `if`, `else`, `for`, and `while` loops.
- **Structs with Methods:** Enables defining custom data types (structs) with associated methods to encapsulate and manage related data and behavior.
- **External File Code Importation:** Supports importing code from external files for better code organization and modularity.
- **Dynamic Typing:** Variables do not require explicit type declarations; types are determined at runtime.
- **Standard Library:** Includes a standard library with built-in functions and data structures, such as lists and utility functions.
- **Bytecode Execution:** Executes bytecode produced by the Luna compiler, providing an efficient and portable way to run Luna programs.
- **Memory Management:** Implements garbage collection for efficient memory management and to prevent memory leaks.

## Overview

Luna represents my initial attempt at designing and implementing a programming language. The goal was to create a language that is simple yet powerful, with a focus on fundamental programming concepts and ease of use. The language features a stack-based virtual machine and includes a variety of basic functionalities suitable for a wide range of programming tasks.

### Writing Luna Code

To write code in Luna, simply create `.luna` files and use the Luna compiler to generate bytecode. The generated bytecode can then be executed on the Luna VM.

### Example Code

Here's a simple examples demonstrating how to program in Luna:

Variables:
```javascript
var a;
var b = "Hello"
```

Comments:
```python
# Comments starts at hash line
```

Import declaration:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core"
```

Using console stdlib functions:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core"

var a = "Hello "

writeln(a + "World")
```

Functions:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core"

def add(x, y) {
    return x + y
}

var result = add(5, 3)
writeln("The result is: " + result)
```

Functions with empty returns use semicolon at end:
```python
import "stdlib/core"

def add(x, y) {
    if(x == null or y == null)
        # semicolon here
        return;
    
    return x + y
}

var result = add(5, 3)
writeln("The result is: " + result)
```

Control flow with `if` and `else`:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core"

var number = 10

if (number > 5) {
    writeln("Number is greater than 5")
} else {
    writeln("Number is 5 or less")
}
```

`For` loops:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core"

for (var i = 0; i < 5; i = i + 1) {
    writeln("Iteration: " + i)
}
```

`Structs` and methods:
```javascript
struct Point {
    def init(x, y) {
        self.x = x
        self.y = y
    }

    def display() {
        writeln("Point(" + self.x + ", " + self.y + ")")
    }
}

var p = Point(10, 20)
p.display()
```

Struct Behavior Copy:
```Python
struct Vector2 {
    def init(x, y) {
        self.x = x
        self.y = y
    }
    
    def length() {
        return sqrt(x * x + y * y)
    }
    
    def getX() {
        return x
    }
    
    def getY() {
        return y
    }
}

# All Vector2 behaviors are copied in Point struct.
struct Point : Vector2 {
    def init(x, y) {
        super.init(x, y)
    }

    def length() {
        return super.length()
    }
    
    def getX() {
        return super.getX()
    }
    
    def getY() {
        return super.getY()
    }
}

```

`Lists`:
```javascript
import "stdlib/core";

var list = List();
list.append(1)
list.append(2)
list.append(3)

for (var i = 0; i < list.length; i = i + 1) {
    writeln("List element: " + list.get(i))
}
```